---
title: Critical Internal Monologue - Turn Down the Volume of Negative Self-Talk.
date:  2021-06-24
coverImage: /assets/img/sinitta-leunen-aFXiQMUi2zA-unsplash.webp
imageAttribution: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@sinileunen?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Sinitta Leunen</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/aFXiQMUi2zA?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>
description: The nature of the contact we make with ourselves is important. It matters because that is how we see ourselves, our core beliefs, our narratives about the world, and the kind of contact we will make with the ‘other.’
---
2021-06-24 09:43:22',
The nature of the contact we make with ourselves is important. It matters because that is how we see ourselves, our core beliefs, our narratives about the world, and the kind of contact we will make with the ‘other.’

It can be a truly empowering and grounding experience. However, it can also be crippling and damaging. Therefore, the way we relate to ourselves is vital. It sets the stage for how we relate to our experiences and the world around us.

The most common way we make a connection with ourselves is via our inner voice. This voice can also represent our thoughts. Furthermore, this voice can be a critical parent, authority figure, or someone with we shared a close bond. Moreover, it could also be someone whose approval held significant weight (contingent upon a hierarchy of achievements, an agenda, a goal).

We do this by catastrophizing our shortcomings. We generalize our mistakes, engage in self-attack, snatch hope, feed ourselves extremely self-debilitating critique. Then, if nothing else works, we harm ourselves by chasing perfection: setting unachievable standards to further feed critique.

Critical internal monologue is how we alter our realities. We view selective information through the lens of the biases we hold.

This critique happens through negative self-talk, which can take the following forms:

”I will always be average at everything I do.” - Blatant self-distrust

”I’m such a mess all the time.” - Casual magnification.

”I will only be worthy of affection when I overcompensate through my behaviors.” - Emotional Reasoning.

”I need to shrink myself or discard all my needs to be accepted.” - Overcompensation to be acknowledged.

”If I’m not loved or cared for, that is the direct measure of my self-worth instead of their capacity to provide that affection.” - Self Attack through personalization and faulty/false blame attribution.

”I’m too dark, too ordinary, not good enough, not intelligent, too emotional.” - Chronic self-doubt.

I call this the critical internal monologue because it speaks with great intensity. It leaves no space for a response. Furthermore, it is an endless struggle for most of us. Moreover, it knows us in the most intimate ways, which is why it can attack us at our weakest spots.

The critique isn’t always counterproductive; the critique itself isn’t as much of a problem as our response. Nevertheless, it is important/essential to turn the monologue into a dialogue. If one does not accomplish this, it will always mimic the voice of an authority figure speaking from a position of power. Thus, creating a power imbalance, so to say, which will inevitably bring about a certain sense of helplessness in us.

One way we can limit the critical internal monologue is by engaging with it in a meaningful way. By providing space to reason, work to empathize and understand where it is coming from.

For example, what is the source of the critique? Where is it coming from? Is the experience of disrespect by a loved one internalized? Has it now taken over your identity? Sit with the thought, the emotion, the reaction it brings out. Acknowledge the bit that is true, but also remember to empathize with the cornered child in you who is scared of judgment.

On a more practical level, remind yourself that just because one has a thought, it does not have to have a reality. The critique will hold no substance if we do not appraise it with meaning. This is where we control our reactions to the critique.

Moreover, we can turn the monologue into a dialogue when we neutralize the critique, toning down the intensity of the harsh critique and making it more balanced, less absolutist in nature. For example, instead of calling yourself ‘a mess all the time’, try acknowledging how you feel ‘scattered in this particular moment.’ Allow yourself contact with your vulnerability **without** intensifying the experience.
When we converse *with another, there is a certain sensitivity attached to how we communicate. Furthermore, what we communicate, our presentation of what needs to be expressed, and how others will receive it.

A major/significant chunk of a typical child’s upbringing revolves around learning to talk ‘politely’ to not make noise. We’re told to choose our words wisely. We’re told to measure our thoughts before we put them forward. But, unfortunately, we limit these norms of polite society to the conservations with the ‘other.’

If we were to talk to someone the same way most of us speak to ourselves, we’d come face to face with the kind of subtle violence we’re capable of inflicting. Our own inner voice is capable of far more viciousness than all the negativity that might surround us. However, if we foster positivity, it can cultivate incredible growth.

References:
1. [Adam, Barry D. (Inferiorization and ‘Self-Esteem.’) Social Psychology, vol. 41, no. 1, 1978, pp. 47ÔÇô53. JSTOR] (http://www.jstor.org/stable/3033596) 
2. [Tod D, Hardy J, Oliver E. Effects of Self-Talk: A Systematic Review J Sport Exerc Psycho. 2011;33(5):666-687. doi:10.1123/jsep.33.5.666] (https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.33.5.666)